0.13: transmute queries (#902)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/news/2024-02-03-bevy-0.13/index.md

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @TODO</div>

## Transmute Queries

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @hymm, james-j-obrien</div>

Have you every wanted to pass a query to a function, but instead of having a

> `Query<&Transform>` you have a `Query<(&Transform, &Velocity)With<Enemy>`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Query<&Transform>` you have a `Query<(&Transform, &Velocity), With<Enemy>>`?
```

Well now you can by using the `Query::transmute_lens` method. Query transmutes
allow you to change a query into different query types as long as the

> componenets accessed are a subset of the original query.

Reviewer: If I understand it correctly, it panics if the type is incompatible. I feel like this should be mentioned, it's easy to assume that it would fail to compile instead.

```rust
fn reusable_function(lens: &mut QueryLens<&Transform>) {
    let query = lens.query();
    // do something with the query...
}

// We can use the function in a system that takes the exact query.
fn system_1(mut query: Query<&Transform>) {
    reusable_function(&mut query.as_query_lens());
}

// We can also use it with a query that does not match exactly
// by transmuting it.
fn system_2(mut query: Query<(&mut Transform, &Velocity), With<Enemy>>) {
    let mut lens = query.transmute_lens::<&Transform>();
    reusable_function(&mut lens);
}
```

> Note that transmuting the query will not allow you to access entities that
> the original query did not access. It will still iterate over that same
> entity data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `QueryLens` will still iterate over the same entities as the
original `Query` it is derived from.

A `QueryLens<&Transform>` taken from a `Query<(&Transform, &Velocity)>`, will
only include the `Transform` of entities with both `Transform` and `Velocity`
components.
```

> Besides removing paramters you can also change them in limited ways to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides removing parameters you can also change them in limited ways to the
```

different smart pointer types. One of the more useful is to change a
`& mut` to a `&`. See the [documentation](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Query.html#method.transmute_lens)
for more details.

One thing to take into consideration is the transmutation is not free.

> It works by recreating a new state and copys a bunch of the cached data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works by creating a new state and copying a bunch of the cached data
```

inside the original query. It's not a expensive operation, but you should

> probably avoid doing it inside a hot loop.

Reviewer: Question: does this cost exist for `as_query_lens()` as well?

Author: Yeah. I guess you could avoid it by taking a &mut Query into your reusable function instead.
